Yeah.
A lot of it is middle-aged guys who have displaced their sort of Don Juan-ism into books.
You know, it's the passionate search.
The moment you get it, you're through with it, you're off to the other book.
I'd like a Diet Coke.
Sure.
Do you have iced tea?
We don't brew our own in South Arizona.
I'll have a day, cool.
All righty.
Do you want to hear what we're featuring today?
I'm sorry?
Okay, sure.
Do you want to hear what we're featuring today?
We have homemade lasagnas.
Anyway, there is a kind of male competitive sort of chasing books instead of chasing women thing.
I go to a book auction.
I really feel it.
But I think it's also a kind of world over which you have some control, and I think when people feel out of control, to have that world, whether it's toy soldiers or books or whatever it is,
There's something comforting.
Oh, good.
We still have some.
Vegetable or hosta?
Our vegetables today are sauteed zucchini, summer squash, and tomatoes.
Hosta?
What was the vegetable again?
It's zucchini, summer squash, and tomato.
I started collecting beginning in high school.
I used to, as I was telling you, buy
I didn't do it that often, but a couple of times.
I remember one of the books was William Sewell's History of the Quakers, early 18th century folio.
I'd buy these battered books, and I was a very sick kid with a lot of surgery, even through high school, and having very painful procedures.
And I was worried about dying.
And I saw these books that had survived a couple hundred years.
And I said, gee, you know, somehow... It's so sad to be worried about dying as it's a young age, isn't it?
Yeah, but I was.
And in fact, even as I just said it, I kind of welled up.
Very powerful moment in my past.
And so there was something comforting.
in buying old books, that they had survived, and also that I could sort of play doctor, reverse the roles, that they were my patients, and I was going to take care of them in the way that I'm taking care of all these books.
And this is starting at about what age?
17, 16, 17.
Were you a readerly kid?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
I was sort of a phenom kid.
In fact, I was...
Is it bothering you?
No, no.
No, it's not bothering me, but it has snakes in your face.
Yeah, I was working for Look Magazine when I was 14.
Come on.
Yeah.
I had been accepted to be a contestant on the 64,000-year-old question when I was eight in astronomy.
Really?
Yeah.
I lived a couple blocks from the Hayden Planetarium, you know, across...
away from New York Historical Society where I used to hang out a lot.
And I was particularly ill when I was eight or nine.
Is this anything that you want to tell me about?
No, I don't.
And my way of dealing with it was kind of controlling the stars.
You know, if I could name the stars, I had some sense of the heavens.
And it's like this astrology thing that I was telling you about.
In fact, I didn't make that connection.
I think the book is significant to me because
this early astronomy thing.
So I hung out with all these guys.
They sort of adopted me at the Hayden Planetarium.
Which I went to as a child, but it's going to be probably ten years before you're going.
I was born in 49, now this is 57.
You know, this is Sputnik, and they're trying to get young kids interested in astronomy.
So I was this phenom in astronomy, and I took all these tests, and the scandal broke about six months before I was scheduled to go on it.
I was nine months away from going on it.
No kidding.
At, you know, I'd be nine.
And you'd have won, too, because you'd have been perfect for them.
Well, yeah, it's fixed.
Well, no, but I was the Jew.
Remember, the Jew always uses to the Gentile at the end.
Did you see the movie?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
But a kid, though.
A kid is going to be the wild card, though.
A kid might be the wild card, yeah.
Of course, astronomy, real astronomy, serious astronomy is 99% math.
I knew it more than any eight-year-old kid.
I always feel moved by old books, and I see them as, as I say, kind of bodies that have suffered and that need some attention and care, and it's a displaced version of my own body.
You must have started reading at a very early age.
If you're eight years old, you're going to go on the $64,000 question.
How did this come about?
Partly it was the historical moment of Sputnik.
How did they come along that you got the invitation to the $64,000?
Oh, oh, well, it's almost embarrassing.
My parents were at a cocktail party with the MC.
Hal March.
Yeah, Hal March.
They were bragging, we have this kid who knows more astronomy than any kid in America.
And he's sort of been taught it orally.
You know, I was sort of helping him set up the Zeiss machine, remember, the big thing.
I read all this stuff.
In 56 and 57, there was this ton of astronomy published to create, get young kids like you into.
And I was the number one boy.
I was the guy they were writing for.
Isn't that great?
So March followed up and you talked to someone?
Well, no, I had three sets of exams.
No, they were serious.
They tested you.
And I was tested against college freshman textbooks.
They were taking questions out of college freshman textbooks, which I could answer.
Did you answer them like that?
I was pretty good.
And then they had to believe it.
It didn't get lucky the first time.
It came down.
Somebody else gave me another version of the test.
And, yeah...
I had this career as a journalist when I was young, in high school.
Where did you go to high school?
I went to a little school in Manhattan, Birchwater.
Because I had all this energy that almost, I mean, extraordinary energy released by my anxieties about dying.
Just had to live, you know, absolutely to the fullest.
So when I was 13, I got a job as an office boy at Look Magazine.
And then I sort of worked up.
I did a little writing for them.
And I ultimately, when I was 17, got a job as a reporter on the London Daily Telegraph, where I covered the Mick Jagger drug trial, among other things, in the summer of 67.
That's amazing.
Yeah.
And I published articles in the Sunday Supplement.
Bylined?
Bylined, of course.
I still have them.
Including one that I thought was pretty damn good.
In those days, there were no rock channels, just BBC One, BBC Two.
BBC Two played a little.
So there were these pirate stations that broadcast from the channel, rock and roll.
And they had a sort of underground school to train disc jockeys for pirate radio stations.
And I...
entered and kind of infiltrated and wrote this story about it.
It was very popular.
The London Times had a magazine supplement.
The Telegraph decided they had to imitate it, and they had just started it in the mid-60s.
And this was, you know, young people were a hot thing in swinging London.
I lived in Haight-Ashbury for the summer of 68.
I was there at the same time.
Yeah.
I was in the 80s, but I lived on Ashbury Street.
Oh, did you?
I got out there in June of 68.
I lived on the corner of Grove and Ashbury, yeah.
So, yeah, I had this sort of heavy-duty career as a kid.
And I kind of burnt out, but I was a wild man.
For instance, I went to Wesleyan.
I got married as a sophomore because I was living life large and fast.
I married a woman who was older, just graduated Smith.
I was from New York.
She was from upstate.
I wanted her to experience New York, so I decided I'd transfer to Columbia just for my junior year, and then I'd go back to Wesleyan to graduate.
I go to their admissions office while I'm in New York, and I said, I'd like an application.
I'd like to apply as a non-matriculating transfer student.
They said, well, we don't take non-matriculating transfers.
It's hard enough to get in as a transfer student, but if you transfer, you've got to transfer for two years.
You can't come for a year in your life.
And then she said, well, that's not our policy.
We don't take non-matriculating transfers.
It's not our policy to take one-year transfers.
So I said, who makes policy?
So she gave me the name of this dean and vice president.
Yeah, oh yeah, that's annoying.
And I made an appointment the same day to see this guy.
I said, I'm the best English major at West Virginia.
Circumstances obliged me to be in New York next year with my new wife.
I want to be associated with the number one English department in the city.
The guy admitted me while I was sitting there.
He called the admissions office.
So I had 00001 was my student number because...
They had no previously matriculating graduates, non-matriculating graduates.
So you went back and got your degree from Wesleyan?
Well, yeah.
How come you didn't want to stay at Columbia to finish up?
Like Wesleyan.
The beauty of Wesleyan was that there were no graduate students.
So I was working at the Beinecke with English professors when I was a sophomore doing work the graduate student research assistants would do.
I was reading Libby Custer's Convent Diary for a guy at the end of my freshman year.
So it was a much better place for undergraduates.
And of course, Columbia sort of closed down for part of that time.
So, describe the books that you were getting as a kid, that you were repairing, and that these were almost... Well, yeah, I didn't do it often, but I remember several times buying it and being moved by books.
I grew up in a neighborhood of Holocaust survivors.
Oh, that's one thing.
We're going to talk about the fourth century.
That's right.
But a lot of my parents' friends were Holocaust survivors.
So here's this sick kid surrounded in both my neighborhood and by parents' friends who are Holocaust survivors.
And I began to sort of think of myself in some way as not a Holocaust survivor, but as a survivor of my own sort.
And then suddenly the books became also survivors.
And the three sort of categories blended a little bit in my own mind.
And part of the poignancy of the book as survivor was these people I knew who were survivors.
And you said some of these were booksellers now?
Well, yeah, who themselves were.
Yeah, between, say, 10th and 13th Street, 9th and 13th Street on 4th Avenue.
You know, I...
This is from somebody who was a high school student, but they certainly seemed to be Jewish to me, and they took to me in a way that suggests that.
Because the key thing with these guys, you know, they had this dusty little tiny place, but they all had attics somewhere where they warehoused their stock.
And I spent many a Saturday afternoon sweet-talking some guy to get somebody to go with me up the four flights of stairs with this key to get in.
Were you looking for anything in particular?
Well, no, it was my version of entering the past, right?
The past that the book talks about, the past of the bookseller, and my own, just somehow this...
Just going into one of these places is an entry into the past.
And going into one of these storerooms, I particularly felt that I spent a lot of time trying to get Argosy Bookstore to let me into their Brooklyn warehouse.
And I finally set it up where they were going to let me go on a truck with some guy.
But I had to promise I'd spend $200, and they'd let me go.
Yeah, oh, and then the truck didn't show up.
I never got there.
But I always wanted to go that next step.
What am I not seeing?
You know, what's hidden?
So at what point did the association copy?
Well, that...
I think when I began to be an English major and realized that, you know, I couldn't afford books from, say, Hawthorne's library, but I could afford books from Hawthorne's son's library.
I could afford books from Melville's sister's library.
So I began to sort of insinuate myself into the lives of these great writers.
And then eventually I was able to, by way, just escape from being sick.
So I was in a kid's ward where kids were dying, playing checkers with a guy, and the next day he wouldn't be there.
And this was when I was five.
So I early on was trying to create a space in another world where I was safe, in the world of books.
And living for you.
Part of that world.
Living a lot?
Yeah, that's fine.
Okay.
Enjoy.
Everything you need then?
Yeah.
Okay.
This is nice.
Isn't it?
Yeah.
Sun.
You said you need the emotional connection with a book, and we're talking about the OED, the electronic OED you're talking about.
It's extraordinary, obviously, what you just described to me.
It's unbelievable.
But what you get is the text of the book.
You don't get the physical object, and the physical object is something.
It's this container for the spirit of the book,
the living character of the book, and you can revisit it.
You own it.
It's there.
You see it.
For me, as I say, I go to my library, I feel comforted.
I like to look at books.
They're full of associations.
When I read it, where I bought it, what it looked like, and then seeing it again.
And that ongoing emotional relationship to the object.
We're all defined by objects.
Every home is a museum to ourselves.
in which you could sort of read everything in it as a marker of one piece of one's life.
And some of our most profound relationships are to objects.
Like the examples I was giving a woman who for 40 years, this is my boon companion, my best friend, has taken me through the vicissitudes of life.
You know, I can read it in bed at night, I can put my head on it.
I can ask the...
Eric Holzenberg, librarian at the Groyer Club.
The librarian where, at Groyer?
At the Groyer Club.
Uh-huh.
And a woman who's replaced Mark Fibonation at Cornell at the Rare Book Library, Catherine Reagan.
So they're putting together a program for the ALA.
in 2000 in Chicago.
It's great because it's when I hope my new book comes out.
So that really would be terrific.
That's something in the right corner.
Me too?
Yeah.
You got it.
Thank you very much.
Thanks.
Yeah.
And the theme of this program is the museum of the book.
Are all libraries, in a sense, are we approaching that day where every library in
will be considered a museum and every book will be an object.
And what do you think about that?
No, I can't see it.
Reading is a very emotional act.
But it's physical?
There's a physicality to it?
Beyond physicality, there's an intimacy.
You're holding this object close to you with both hands.
I know when I'm reading, I'm usually lying down.
It's a very private act.
Something's going on.
See, the problem with machine-readable stuff is it's all based on an information transfer model.
Reading is not about information transfer.
It's about an emotional engagement with language.
And you need to be in a sort of protected setting.
You need to be comfortable because...
You're opening your mind to things.
You're thinking through issues in your own life, through the book.
And once you've read it, you want to keep it, because it's now part of who you are.
Keeping it is the key word, by the way.
Yeah.
Well, the experience... When you're done, we're going to go to... I'll mention something to your book.
Go ahead.
You got it.
Because it's a relationship.
It's started.
There can be re-readings.
There can be just the pleasure of knowing you have it.
The pleasure of having it there.
What it suggests about you to yourself.
You know, I have students who say, I'll teach them something like Absalom, Absalom.
Difficult book.
the sense of triumph and mastery of completing it and understanding it to some degree is so enormous.
They want that book on their shelf for the rest of their lives.
I was thinking of my British Shakespeare.
Yeah, you know, you said... I go on it to a girl and she never gave it back and how for 25 years I've been trying to... Yeah, exactly.
And I still have it.
Because you had an intimate relationship.
You had an intimate relationship.
And that intimacy is completely impossible.
is destroyed and impossible to achieve.
And it's like sleeping with somebody who disappears the minute you're done.
You've got to have something, some token of its presence.
Go ahead.
Yeah, it's very powerful to... So I'm going to start a chapter.
I think start a chapter.
I'm going into... I like scenes and I like...
I like narrative.
I like stories.
So what's your reaction to that?
To this electronic book?
That is not like the ones that are being marketed now where they just give you text and something that's like a little computer, a palm thing.
This is actually a book that will have 300
computer screens with the texture of a page and you'll be able to load a book on there when you're done you'll be able to load another book is that there is a physicality to it but it's not permanent is it i don't know it's not permanent it's not it's so completely mediated that it doesn't have the power of the physical presence of a book i collect old books i like
For me, I like to see the thumbprint where somebody has turned the page over and over again.
There's some pattern of wear.
There have been people here before, and I'm now joining the company of previous readers of this particular copy of a book.
It's like if I go into an art lecture, you see these slides, and they make every picture, every painting, look the same size.
You can have a painting this big and a painting this big, but the slides are all the same.
And the same thing here.
You lose the specificity of how this book was housed.
You can't, to separate the text from the book, to separate the artifact from the meaning, does real violence to the fact that the meaning has...
proceeds out of the artifact in some ways.
Again, as I was saying about that monumental folio, as opposed to this will do a decimal of sermons, that folio is making a cultural statement, a very powerful sort.
This is the orthodoxy, this is here, and this will last.
It's the pillar of your church.
Are you familiar with a book called Paratexts?
No.
Oh, you should.
If you have a fax or something, I'll fax it.
Ken Carpenter at Harvard.
He's the guy at the Widener Library.
He decides which book.
You know, for bibliographers, the book, it's important the moment it came out.
But, you know, books have long, long lives.
Like some of these books are in the same family for 300 years.
Books do survive, don't they?
Yeah, they survive.
The book you showed me in the Frederick Douglass.
Yeah.
We don't know where that was for 80 or so years.
Is that right?
How many years?
Not 80, but however many years it was.
You can't tell me.
It's got one of the best provenances I've ever seen initially.
Yeah.
But then, somehow it shows up in Paris.
How it got to Paris from England, we don't know.
But it survived.
It survived.
And you know, most books say prior, leaving aside Douglass, but earlier books, there are different compositors who have different spelling forms.
You know, you look at a Shakespeare first folio, there's been recent work done on
Well, not just the collation, but inferring the existence of a certain number of collators.
When you have an unstable spelling, as was the case in Elizabethan England, you don't look it up in the dictionary.
There were compositors who had their own spellings and normalized to them.
They'd always use it this way.
So the same word might appear four or five different ways.
And it's not just the accident.
It's the fact that there are different compositors.
The book is a collaborative object.
It's made by machines and by people and out of real products.
And...
that collaborative text or that collaborative artifact is lost.
And if we were talking, imagine to have a relationship, let's say, with a woman, you could never touch it.
What it means to take touch out of the equation is enormous.
We're humanized by touch.
We sort of bring things to life by touching them and being touched by them.
So you think there is definitely something innate?
There's an absolute physical need to hold, to touch, to be intimate with, to learn from, to make yourself vulnerable and receptive.
When you're reading, you've put yourself in an incredibly vulnerable position of being
sort of utterly receptive.
And you've given a gift to the book to present yourself in a manner that allows it to make a difference and touch you in deep places.
And that's an experience that requires the prerequisite of a certain sort of emotional setting and the terms of a physical intimacy.
You remember we were talking about a possible title for this book, and I've played with about six of them now.
There was one I liked, Archibald McLeish.
It's related to the word textile.
They both have to do with... Text is related to textile?
They come from the same term.
It's the wolf in war.
When you're talking about spinning of yarn, you're talking about textile and you're talking about a text.
Interesting.
And... Or...
spinning a yarn or... There are a number of textile things, but it's something that is put together in a way that creates a design.
I'm just playing with the words text and textile.
Account...
Give me a second here to think about things.
But it doesn't telegraph immediately.
So you were thinking about text and texting.
It's playing with something now.
Well, you know, what I'm doing... But that's a kind of... I mean, in a sense, you're sort of doing that, too.
What I'm really reading are... I'm reading writing in books.
Not the book as writing, but writing, handwriting, whether it's annotations or signatures, writing in books.
But reading readers, I kind of like that.
I do, but I don't think it's my whole... It doesn't describe the wholeness of the project.
It's an aspect of it.
I'm going to.
There's all those gerunds that sort of work both ways.
It's the act of reading, and it's something you're witnessing, other people reading, and just what your investigation is.
And of course, it's the house of work.
You made a singular here.
Well, I know, but... I like it.
The singular works better.
It does, it does.
Because there are all sort of incarnations of one another.
There's, you know, the ultimate house of work.
Well, these are all versions of it.
It's not bad.
Oh, good.